[Music]
welcome to the art of accomplishment
where we explore how deepening
connection with ourselves and others
leads to creating the life we want with
enjoyment and ease
my name is Brett Kistler and I'm here
with my co-host Joe Hudson
ah good morning
good morning Brett how are you doing
yeah doing well I I just got back from a
from an experience that I found very
fascinating there was a I want to kind
of keep the details sort of General here
but there was sort of a a personal
development
like event that I went to uh Retreat
that I found very fascinating and I
really loved a lot of what was being
taught and there was also some aspect of
it some component that just sort of
rubbed me the wrong way
and in this particular case
the flavor of it was
you know these these teachings
are you know this these are the ways
that we can free ourselves and the world
needs this the world needs us to free
ourselves
yeah from our constraints so that we can
Heal the World by healing ourselves but
there was a little bit of like pressure
in it and I sat with that through the
entire Retreat yeah with this
juxtaposition of there's so much
goodness here
yeah and also there's this feeling of
pressure
yeah and I could feel it in the people
around me like buying it like yes this
is needed right uh and it just yeah it
brought up this topic for me of
you know there's there's so much out
there that people can explore on whether
it's a spiritual path or a meditation
practice or whether it's a
self-development workshop or some
psychedelic facilitator they might sit
with or or simply just a meditation app
or
a church or a
a group you know there's there's so much
out there and that was one particular
example of something that I see common
in in many of them and I just wanted to
sort of have a conversation about what
are some of the the signs of
where a teacher or a path or a practice
where there might be something you want
to look into here I don't even want to
use the word red flag but yeah just what
are some of the Dynamics that can occur
I I would say that there is like some
red flags and there is some also
humanity and I think those get confused
often and they so
to be specific there is no such thing as
a perfect path and and if you believe it
then it's like a religion it's like a
faith right because all path comes from
human consciousness and there is no such
thing as a perfect human consciousness
in fact I would say one of the one of
the signs that up that like there's a
little bit of wonkiness in a path is
like the idea that there's some
Perfection that can be reached and then
you're done I think that is part of
part of like what what could be wonky
and so there knows there is no such
thing as like the perfect teacher the
perfect path or anything like that and
at the same time there's like some
absolutely Dangerous Ones and and what's
even weirder than that is that
oftentimes the folks that I know who
like end up in some of these dangerous
dangerous paths often that's what they
needed like it's you know it's where
they it's like what they fell for and
therefore it's the holding the
Consciousness that they
need to look at I mean hopefully nobody
needs to be you know branded or
brainwashed or any of those things or
you know I think there's been cases of
people neutering themselves or like
whatever killing themselves you know
like Jim Jones or whatever so you don't
there's obviously some red flags there
but there's also and and there's also a
process in that too just to say that I
have seen
you know pass and teachers go from
pretty healthy to pretty wonky and I've
actually seen once uh one go from a
little wonky to more and more healthy
which has been was a fascinating journey
to see
um
so yeah I think it's a really good
discussion and I think I would frame it
as what to look for
when you're trying to figure out how
healthy a path is the the but the other
piece is that there everybody comes with
that kind of skepticism of the path and
oftentimes people don't get the most
they can out of a practice because
they're finding the faults in in the
system or the teacher and and and
finding the faults are important so it's
kind of this weird thing it's like how
do you actually
absorb everything and then discern
instead of I'm not going to absorb it
because of discernment it's a it is a
tricky balance and I don't yeah there's
no perfect way to do it yeah that's
that's where I had some hesitance to use
the word red flags because when
someone's looking for red flags you'll
find them everywhere and especially if
you're stepping into a process that is
really powerful it will bring you into
resistance and the one of the first ways
many people's resistance will show up is
in criticizing finding all the ways it's
wrong putting yourself above it
separating yourself from it separating
yourself from the group and those are
beautiful ways to block the process
so that you're you know those are also
beautiful ways to make a teacher go nuts
but let's talk about that yeah let's
first talk about let's first just talk
about you know what to look for and then
let's talk about how the interaction
between
the group the student and the teacher
all can like downward spiral or upward
spiral you know yeah and how that goes
to it cool
so I mean here's I mean let how about
you go through the things that you you
see as
as red flags or as like
I don't know the way that you would
judge how functional a path or uh
teaching is yeah yeah in general the
first the first thing that comes up is
certainty
if it's being taught with certainty
I mean there can be there can be
conviction and belief in the power of
the practice
and if that's not held with Wonder
for its own blind spots with space for
space for resistance or dissent to arise
and also there's discernment in how much
of that you're allow to arise as a
facilitator in a container
um so there's there's a bit of a
balancing act there and there's also
recognizing where that is rebellion and
that is like actually just trying to
break the container and how to hold that
in a so there's there's that Balancing
Act and and that's one of the things
that I would see is is just in general
if somebody is speaking to me with
absolute certainty or if I catch myself
speaking with absolute certainty
there's a sign that there's something
that I'm not willing to experience
probably some form of helplessness or
not knowing
I I was either a teacher then I'm
curious about that yeah I would say it's
a I think often talking with certainty
is a really important part of teaching
or people don't want to listen for me
it's identification the way I would
describe it is identification if the
person is identified with their teaching
they think their teaching is the right
way that they're not you know I I speak
with certainty and at the same time
someone's like you're full of [__] I'm
like yeah absolutely you know like the
other dads with the CEO for instance and
they were like you made this [__] up and
I'm like yeah just like you made up your
company we that's what we're doing we're
just making [__] up that's how this
works so uh so like to be able to be in
that space to be non-identified with the
teaching or the way
um yeah yeah but and there is you're
right about certainty in the fact that
even though someone speaks with
certainty it doesn't mean that they will
defend their teaching or you know it's
like a defensiveness that crops up right
it's definitely a red flag yeah what
else do you see what what are the other
ways that you yeah another another one
would be
this
on one side of the coin it's like a
gatekeeping of authority and the other
side of the coin it's not continuously
referring back to the authority within
the student or within the
yeah the guest or participant or any
individual or any co-facilitator
um and so a lot of the ways that that
might show up is like you know this is a
thousand zero tradition and my teacher
bestowed this upon me and I'm you know
reluctant to do it even like if you want
to be a teacher you shouldn't be a
teacher it's only if you were like
dragged into it that's sort of a
separate that's a separate point there
but um
but yeah this is another one where it's
an interesting Paradox where if you have
a tradition it's really powerful and you
let anybody come in and do one workshop
and then go teach it themselves you're
going to dilute what it is that you're
doing and
I would I would argue unethical it's
unethical yeah too
to give like a sword to an infant yeah
right because the powerful components of
it will then get adopted by an
inexperienced teacher's neurosis and
they'll use it to control or create the
situation that recreates the trauma that
they're currently playing out
so yeah again it's it's another one of
those paradoxes it's like we we go to a
facilitator or a teacher or a coach
because we expect that they have
something to offer us
that yeah
if we have it in US it feels obscured
and we're looking for help with that
and there are many times where people
are just really happy to be like in that
position and say
yeah it's
I'm connected to the spirits and they
say this about what you should do
and
things go wonky from there yeah I would
say that the way I speak to this one is
delegation of authority meaning if the
people are delegating their authority to
a teacher or the teacher is assuming
authority over students and that usually
can look like
very strong hierarchy or Gatekeepers to
you know like some levels of power that
move up that that's usually a good sign
of it
um but the if the teacher isn't directly
occasionally saying hey the truth is in
you it's not in me it's a very important
that's a really important
sign that the that there's something
else going on besides
you know uh uh like I would say there's
more dysfunction in that situation why
like whatever would make a teacher want
to have the authority over other people
or that kind of a thing and it doesn't
mean that they might not know stuff that
you don't know but the one thing for
sure is that you know what you should do
next better than anybody not better than
any teacher teacher might be able to
point out patterns and stuff like that
but your journey is yours and you're the
authority of it and that's that's
critical of a path isn't pointing there
yeah and it might even be that
eventually you reach the same
conclusions that you're currently
resisting but the process of your
resistance is actually where you're
going to find what actually is true for
you and not just take it for granted and
then
adopt a belief system that suppresses
some aspect of your reality
that if fully felt would ultimately
perhaps result in having agreement with
you with this person yeah there's some
others in there that are pretty they're
a little bit more direct there's like
one of the things you just mentioned was
we have to save the world that's a
pretty yeah that's a pretty big flag
only we can do it that's a pretty big
flag there's an Us and Them component of
it you know we have to save the world
from
billionaires we have to save the world
from close-minded people we have to save
the world from climate change
um there's like
that kind of um
urgency and anxiety behind the spiritual
tradition also shows some level of of
dysfunction
um there's also things like I've seen
like
this is true I like one male teacher
only teaching females and telling the
females not to uh not to talk to their
husbands or boyfriends about what
happens in the room that's like those
are secrecy secrecy non-transparency
there's some transparency that you can't
go all transparent meaning let's say you
have a week-long retreat
you don't want everybody telling
everybody what's in that week-long
retreat
um because then you destroyed the ex you
know things for other people and there
are certain practices that are really
hardcore practices and you don't want
people out there you know just throwing
them around because people can get hurt
other folks can get hurt
I mean the way and this is the hardest
thing for me to actually
um go through we ask just for people to
ask permission from us to use our work
and that way it gives us a chance to be
in a communication with them and see if
they're ready if you know how dangerous
it's going to be and give them a path to
be able to share the work
um but we ask that but that's the one of
the hardest things we found to because
on one level you want full transparency
on another level you have an obligation
both to the work and to the people who
touch it
and so that's that's another one that's
that's because some of them are like
very serious like you hit this level and
then you get this door opened and then
you hit this level and then you get this
door opened and then people in level
seven Are Better Than People on level
five and that that that's really that's
a pretty big sign that there's some
destruction going on yeah and that's
that's yeah it's just another example
there's if you have if you have one
person who is supposedly at a certain
level and then they are the ones because
of that that are capable of seeing what
level others are at and they're like the
sole decision maker as to where like and
this is this is difficult because that's
what what else is like you know a CEO or
right or or you know
there's just a lot of a lot of ways that
this Paradox comes up in life not just
in in a personal development practice
um yes another one is sort of uh I don't
know this shows up often as feigned
reluctance
of being in the role
um
you know somebody who says I just have
to do this it's not my choice right the
world needs me to do this and
you know I wouldn't I wouldn't be doing
this if it weren't for the fact that it
just is required of me
so there's there's a weirdness there
because that's actually to some degree
my experience right not I don't feel
like I have to do it by any stretch and
I don't feel like the world is asking me
to do it
but there is an experience of
choicelessness in it there is an
experience of like this is my calling
and I'm and I and I and there was and
there was indeed a reluctance to it at
the same time
me being reluctant created a lot of
dysfunction so so like me actually I
remember earlier on there was this
learning that I had which was like I I
was like I don't have power here I don't
have any power because I'm constantly
pointing to everybody else to be their
own authority and and in that I created
quite a bit of dysfunction and I had to
learn oh no power is when people think
you have power that's all power is and
so I have it because people think I have
it
and to be able to own that and to walk
in that space instead of deny it
uh was really important I created a lot
of dysfunction by not doing that so on
some level I I can definitely feel the
like I'm pushed into this situation is
there's a feeling of being or pulled
into this situation there's a
choicelessness in it and there's also
like and there's a choice that you made
and you it's an ownership of that and
you have to be functional about it so
it's there's a bit of a bounce there but
I understand what you're pointing to for
sure yeah yeah there's a there's sort of
an expansiveness or a contraction around
it and correct when I when I notice
myself feel feel a contraction also
other other people in the group will
feel a contraction is when I feel the
teacher contracted or the teacher or the
facilitator or whatever word we're using
here yeah
um
if if they feel some form of threat
around what happens if they don't do
this because
the world will X or you know it's it's
needed
yeah if there's some self-importance in
it that's not being owned if it seems
owned if it's not feeling important and
also I don't need you to see me as
important and I feel like this stuff is
really important but I'm not taking it
so seriously as to believe that I know
what's best for others and the world and
what the world needs like there's the
arrogance in that of or just it's really
the suffering and it needs to stop
suffering and I'm qualified to determine
that and therefore we who have this
secret knowledge are the ones
right who are who are needed uh
somewhere somewhere in there there's the
constriction where I just feel myself
closed down and I can feel the
constriction in in the group there's
fear in it it's oh the world is
dangerous and we've got to do this
yeah that what I really like there is
that there's a subtle pointer in there
about uh or a potential pointer of of
ownership
and it's like if they can say I think
this is important this is important to
me you know I'm yeah I I don't want to
do that but I don't feel like I have a
choice it's very different than I don't
have a choice right like there's an
ownership of their experience and I
think that that in general when I see
teachers who own their experience as
theirs not other people's that's a
pretty good sign
in general
that's another one yeah and the teacher
that always sees that they're learning
is another really good sign that that is
constantly in a place of learning yeah I
guess that relates back to the
to the delegation of authority if the
teacher is delegating their authority to
what is needed externally from them
rather than what is coming through them
and feels like what they want and what
they need
and yeah there's when when we're in in
deep contact with
who we are we we don't really know what
we're going to do next it's not that
predictable and so it kind of comes from
this place of I have no idea what's
going to happen next and I'm just
feeling called into this and this is
what I want to do now and but when
there's not an ownership of that where
it's like I'm doing that because it's
right externally necessary that I do
this
yeah that feels like the where the
ownership Falls away I think that's
another really good pointer of a
teaching that I would have a lot more
respect and Trust for what I would feel
is has more function is
when
the
when they're not supplying certainty to
folks if a teacher is supplying
certainty if they're a certainty
supplier
then they're just creating another
framework instead of helping people see
through all the Frameworks seeing like
the freedom doesn't come from buying one
set of thoughts Freedom comes from not
buying any thoughts and that's very
scary because most people are looking
for some sort of ground uncertainty
and so it's much easier to sell
certainty than it is to say yeah lack of
certainty but the but the functional
teaching is not is not selling certainty
as a matter of fact there's this great
I think it's the I think it's a Hindu
tradition where they basically say and
the path one of the last things that
goes away is the teacher and then the
teaching meaning that like you have to
see through the scripture that none of
the scripture is right and you have to
see through the teacher that the teacher
isn't right to get to what they would
call you know uh freedom and so I think
that that's a path that sees that
uncertainty is a really important step
in the process is
is a really good sign of functionality
rather than yeah this is the way and
it's finished yeah I would almost even
say that that's
it feels to me that that's not just like
a last thing to fall away but that's
also part of the process of it working
is to see through the things it's like
and so another another piece that I see
here which is which can be a red flag is
like what is the promise
if if the premise of the path is some
clear end state that everybody seems to
be constantly seeking
something magical about it right whether
it's
Enlightenment or Awakening but it's it's
not just about like what the words are
but it's about really what the sort of
the if there's like a state attachment
to yes and then your problems will be
then you're good then the suffering will
end
then you're good enough
that's another thing I watch for because
it's that will just continue forever you
can do all kinds of work on yourself and
move a lot of
you know
trauma
and still
continuously organize your momentary
experience around something that hasn't
arrived yet in the future
and around the notion that the present
is not actually good enough
yeah what's interesting is what's
donning on me in this process I'm
thinking about you know a friend friends
of mine who have a really deep and
meaningful like Christian experience or
really deep and meaningful
Buddhist experience
or Muslim experience where there is like
this feeling of certainty in them and
and so it's like there's some way in
which I've seen some people in those
things in those experiences where it
feels like the authority is being handed
over and there's some people in those
experience where the authority isn't
being handed over
meaning that like you could have a
relationship with Christ as
like oh this is my direct relationship
with Christ and this is where I go for
the authority is in that relationship as
compared to this is my relationship with
Christ in it and it is exactly that
which agrees with my particular
interpretation of this Bible or you know
so they're even in that even though that
there there is this way in which a
certainty can happen in um in a
religious context there's still this um
individual Authority in it there's like
the direct relationship with the
meditation and I mean Buddha said don't
trust me you trust your direct
experience and so I think that that's
the relationship with Christ or Muhammad
or or in the Buddhist context it's even
in this it's it's not saying you can't
have that framework it's saying that is
the is the is this particular form of
Christianity pointing you back to your
relationship
with God is this pointing you back to
your experience or is this one of those
forms of Christianity where it's Follow
the Leader it's don't trust your own do
the rules follow the rules that kind of
thing so I think yeah just to say that I
want to make sure that people aren't
thinking that we're saying all religious
all the ways of being religious are not
beautiful yeah absolutely and and even
just to bring in a a different example
just to show that this isn't even about
religion
there can be the
sort of Western societal pattern of work
hard all of your life to save for a
future retirement
right and not pay and because of that
not be really present and
enjoying your life now as it actually is
with an eye to the Future it's the same
thing it's like if somebody's selling me
a product that will eventually get me to
a place but it's just a treadmill then
that's a red flag you know or maybe I'll
go on that path for a while and I'll
learn something about myself and it'll
be ultimately healthy for me to have had
that experience
so let's go into that because I do think
that there's a lot of places that this
whatever we're talking about here is
actually part of every part of our
existence but before we do I want to
talk about how these religious past and
traditions go sideways yeah because I
think one of the one of the biggest
misnomers there is
oh this teaches a bad teacher this
teacher went berserk or this teacher as
if it's not a relationship between the
teacher and the people and like it's as
if it's not a group decision that's
being made right so we talked about this
earlier so I want to bring it back to
this but there's lots of versions of
this which is you know as a teacher you
get attacked quite a bit right you get
you know people are like well let me
what's wrong with you you that's sitting
up here thinking that you can you know
have Authority or you know you just like
their people are looking at everything
and look at what you did see that shows
that your Consciousness is [__] up and
like all all that stuff happens right
there's people right now listening to
this podcast criticizing what was just
said and absolutely and and it's and
what that typically does is it creates
defense in people what that typically
does is
you know a good example of this I've
been thinking about you know doing more
YouTube and Instagram stuff and putting
myself out there so I looked at like
three or four people I respected who
started putting the content out there
and I noticed that they all kind of went
a little berserk
and I think there's two reasons that
they all went a little berserk the first
one is that they have to put out new
content all the time and so and people
like listening to people who are certain
so they put out their content with
certainty
and they believe their uncertainty it
seems like and
and therefore they just start thinking
they know more and more and more than
they actually know that's part of the
berserk process but part of it is that
everybody attacks them and then they get
more and more defensive and they get
more and more like armored and they
become more and more narcissistic and
it's and it's not it's not it's a
relationship it's a relationship with
the audience it's a relationship with
the Sangha it's a relation it's like
that thing where people want a lot of
people want somebody with a Halo
somebody they want somebody who's
perfect and then they maybe even want to
bring them down a notch and take them
down
and that whole relation it's not
you know it's like and and the other
thing is it's incredibly lonely right
like when people view me as their
Authority and they're trying to please
me they're not being with me right it's
it's they they forget that I'm human and
I have a heart and I'm a person and
um and so there's a way in which they
sever connection with me
um and so
part of the process is to you know if
you're in a tradition is to treat the
person like a human not like not like
trying to prove if they're the right
Authority or not right like you're the
authority and when you know that you
don't need to prove it you can just be
with them as humans and with all their
ups and downs and goods and bads or
whatnot you know they're like even if
your teacher has like some crazy ass
power that you're like what the [__]
going on right like people see me do
these rapid fire coachings and they're
like holy [__] that dude's Insight like
he just
like knocked somebody clear into the
their biggest issue in like [__]
three minutes how did he do that yeah
and I'm still human and I and I'm still
not finished and I'm still growing and
and so
I think it's that's true for every
teacher I've met no matter what they
present as like these powerful things
that they can do these healings or
whatever it is these insights and so I
think that that that relationship back
and forth between is really important
and if
and then the other piece that's really
important is like what I notice is you
know like we've gone to Burning Man and
there's people are like yeah man I've
been going to Burning Man for 15 years
oh yeah I've been going to Burning Man
for 20 years like they even identifying
that and you see that happen around a
teaching or a teacher where people start
defining how good they are by how long
they've been with the teaching or the
teacher or how close they are to the
teacher yeah and that is super dis
dysfunctional whether the teacher is
aware of it or not like that kind of
like
uh what do you you know like gatekeeping
and ownership and identification
like super dangerous and that has
nothing to do with the teachers teacher
might not have the knowledge to know
like oh I have to stop that so that's
another yeah that's a fascinating
pattern that I've seen in and this isn't
this isn't Universal but a pattern that
I've seen where like a group has gone
wonky is often that it's like the the
right hand person who
had like the most Distortion and brought
the most sinister
stuff to the group the most control and
perhaps they're in like they're the one
that has to
maintain their position
vis-a-vis another person rather than
vis-a-vis
there
you know Divine claim to Authority so
whether it's the single second person in
command or whether it's just a number of
people in the group you know people can
come to this work and be like wow Joe
he's an amazing coach I want to be a
great coach
and
I'll go through a bunch of courses and I
did this you know like immediately like
how quickly can I use this and do these
things myself and then I'd like start
sitting down with my friends and start
like coaching the [__] out of them
without permission right
ouch and like that would be yeah
and you know that's just like how you I
don't see any how any teacher could
avoid that occurring especially the
larger your
uh practice or your organization or your
group or your Sangha grows there's going
to be a number of people who are taking
it and trying to use it with maybe the
best of intentions it gets even weirder
is because usually the right-hand person
likes control because they're really
good at organizing [__] and so because
that's what makes them the right in
person they can get a lot of [__] done
and they can organize a lot of [__] and
so that like tendency for control is
also serves the group
if they but it can also turn into crazy
wonkiness because the control gets you
know
hyper and protective and defensive and
all that good stuff it's um
yeah it's a it's a total interesting
phenomenon and there is this other thing
that happens too which is like when you
do seed your authority to a group
there's a feeling of safety to it
there's a feeling of being loved and
accepted there's a feeling of belonging
that happens to it and you see this in
many many religions like oh here's this
way that we all agree on this thing
together and therefore we're safe and
therefore we can support each other and
and
and it's a it's a thing to be able to
give that same kind of support and love
and sense of belonging without seating
your Authority like it is a it is a walk
to take and
like you said this is not Justin
in religious you know or spiritual or
self-development things this goes into
all the parts of society we all want to
be on the inside of something it feels
safe there yeah and it's especially easy
to feel on the inside of something if
there's an outside in others right yeah
but it doesn't have to be big red big
red flag there right there and then
there's others and you see this so let's
talk about that let's talk about how all
this happens not just in not just in in
kind of teachings and paths it happens
in I mean in one of the most obvious
ones is this is like every political
rant ever right like right there's a
good guy that's us there's a bad guy
that is pick a billionaire B radical
left C uh
fascist right you know what I mean like
Progressive there's always a bad guy
there's always a good guy it's always us
against them there's always some fear
lurking around the corner then the world
needs us or the whole thing is going to
fall apart and there's somebody who and
there's not transparency and there's
like we know and they don't know and
there's some and you're seeding your
authority over to
some religious
or some political figure instead of
thinking for yourself or some news
channel instead of thinking for yourself
it happens exactly there and what's
really interesting is in our society
right now I was just reading this thing
is really cool
is that
Colts used to just be
religious cults and now there's
political Cults there's like Cults of
like political belief where so it's like
it happens there happens in companies it
happens in marriages it happens
everywhere yeah and also around national
identity one one thing that I find
really this is also on brand for for our
podcast with a lot of a lot of
entrepreneurs listening
like look at the the common wisdom about
how to write a pitch deck for
fundraising it's like right here's a
problem there's this big problem yes it
needs to be solved yeah there's
inevitable consequences to it not being
solved we can solve it only we can solve
it though this is the team
this is the team that can solve it and
then you know underneath that there's
like the seeing seeing the herd Dynamics
in investors and
using some fomo to get everybody to like
dive in and like Pile in on this
investment before they they miss out and
that's just how things are done and the
same thing occurs in marketing if you
look at a billboard for a beauty ad
yeah yeah it's sexy right here's a way
that we are special it's like the whole
thing pitches the way in which we are
special and you can be a part of this
special thing
and we're special because there's others
who aren't like us there's a mess
against them there's
um
there is
uh we're the only ones there's the
inevitability of Crisis if we don't
handle this you know like oh my God
everybody's gonna smell you and you're
gonna smell horrible if you don't use
our deodorant it is literally
the same thing
and and
the and the reason it's the same thing
is that
a lot of folks
um they they they want to own your
Authority they want to own your
Authority because they think it's going
to make them happy
they want you they want to decide for
you to buy the deodorant
and what's really interesting is that
you know there's some really great books
on this but a CEO this happens in a lot
of companies I've been in in I've seen
companies you know when I go in and work
with folks in companies I've seen
companies that have very cult like
um experiences where you know they all
have this very clear identity there's a
bad guy there's a good guy there's a
time limit there is an inevitability
unless they do X Y and Z and they and
they firmly believe it and to some
degree that's incredibly motivating
for them on another another thing is
that it makes very fragile companies
what I've seen is the really robust
companies are the companies that are in
debate and there's a there's great data
on this one of my favorite is the
Aristotle project done by Google
where they really talk about
how a team that where there can be
really free debate and everybody feels
comfortable debating and the voices are
are all voices can be heard no matter
how contrarian the Viewpoint is is what
makes the most functional teams so it's
the same thing it's like you can get
away you can and it's the same thing
with the religious traditions and the
fact that or the or the self-development
Traditions is that you can get a lot of
benefit from
there's a lot of benefit to be had from
dysfunctional paths right there's a lot
of cool tools and great learnings and
I've gone into some consciously and said
oh I know there's some cool stuff in
here I'm gonna just not pay attention to
these things and I'm gonna
get in learn some stuff get out
so there's a lot of benefit to them and
I think what happens is as humans is
we're we know on some level oh this is
wonky this is wonky but there's some
benefit I'm not ready to give up the
benefit yet and so sometimes that
wonkiness gets us instead of we getting
out before of course too late yeah I
also I'm also curious to speak about
this in in terms of relationships
because a lot of this also a controlling
partner and abusive partner is the one
who's like
okay I love you baby you need me you
don't need those friends anymore
you know everyone else is out there
trying to get us
or even just some like the kind of more
romantic things like it's you and me
versus the world like like without any
of the other stuff right
um like what right yeah reverses and
there's this social isolating and that's
all the abusive but I would say wow 90
of the relationships I've seen I have
seen there's an agreement that this
person's the smart one and this person
is not so smart this one's the
intelligent one this one's the emotional
one like there's the seating of
authority all the time how many times
like oh I can't do that because I need
her to be happy or I need him to be
happy
or they couldn't live without me I can
me or right so all the time in there's
like somebody's need for control around
a certain subject inside of a marriage
creates
um craziest same kind of level
dysfunction using the same tools using
the exact same tools and and and what's
cool about that what make lets you see
it is that
it is subconscious in most of the
marriages that this is happening and it
is subconscious that it's happening in
most companies and it is subconscious
that's happening in different spiritual
uh Traditions it is not like very few
I've met a couple but very few of these
people are consciously going okay I know
how to manipulate a whole bunch of
people I'm gonna use you know pathos and
ethos and logos and I'm gonna you know
doing us against them and some of it's
happening but most of the time it's like
they act the politician speaking it
actually thinks it they actually think
that there's somebody who's gonna come
and get them not all of them but like
some of them so
yeah it's just amazing obviously there's
those who are just manipulating people
for the cash and there's ways it's real
if you're gonna get into politics
there's going to be mud slung yeah
if you are looking for a place where
there's an US versus them
in your life get into politics
I think the last the last piece on this
one which is all of this is a projection
of our own yeah Consciousness which is
why I said that you might get into a
dysfunctional
situation but it's often the thing that
you need to learn
and so this is all happening inside of
us we have a voice in the head for most
of us have a very strong voice in the
head and we believe that voice in the
head
when it says you have to do this or
you're going to be in pain or it's only
you that can do it and why haven't you
gotten off the couch and blah blah blah
like all those exact same things the US
and thems they have to do it the urgency
the that's all happening from The Voice
in our head Talking to Ourselves
and
and so all of this is just a projection
and it all falls apart when you see it
in yourself when you can no longer
believe the urgency the US and them from
The Voice in your head when you can no
longer believe that your voice in your
head is the authority telling you you
have to exercise more oh you are right
you know and I am the bad person who
isn't doing it you know like that whole
dynamic is happening inside of us and
when you see through the dynamic and the
voice in your head then none you don't
fall for any of this stuff you don't
watch an ad and think oh yeah everybody
will love me because I have like thinner
thighs or whatever the crap it is right
they're selling right and everybody
loving me matters because
I don't love myself
right so yeah so we're getting close to
time here but I have one more one more
place I'd love to apply this how has
this shown up for you as a parent yeah
oh goodness gracious that is wow holy
crap I haven't even thought about that
yeah this is probably where most of my
um
most of my thoughtfulness what most of
my attention goes to Parenting teenagers
anyways um
when kids are young you are the
authority and you should be and that's
how it works I you know like teaching
them how to sleep and how to eat and
teaching them how to be with their
emotional experiences it's your job and
you are the authority and whether you
ignore it or you don't ignore it it
you're you are training them and so
being conscious about it and being
forthright in it I think is really
important
as they get older the main thing you
want to do is teach them how to be their
own authority right so
I I often just didn't even give
compliments to kids there's some good
research on this and
so with the kids and it was so counter
it was so counter to how I thought it
was going to be and and how I thought I
should have done it but you know kids
like they get their homework done and
I'm not like good job and I see that
they're excited I'm like oh I see how
excited you are yeah
and I'll be excited with them because I
don't want them to do their homework
because I said to them
that's a good job I don't I don't want
to be their third I want them to learn
to listen to themselves
and that's why today my girls do their
work without any nagging whatsoever it's
like I I literally had one of my
daughters tell me she's like I've gotten
Straight A's and you've never
congratulated I was like I'm so sorry
I'm so sorry
and I told her how proud I was of her
and you know and and and how I I
realized the work that was put into it
but it's so important to me so maybe I
over corrected there but it was so
important for me to have them be able to
listen to themselves and not tell them
what to do and then I had the exact
opposite thing happen with Esme recently
which is crazy
um Esme wanted to do a project so I'm
like cool do the project I'll support
you
and it just wasn't happening it wasn't
getting done and um
at some point I'm like yeah I don't
really want to support you because it's
not getting done and she's like what I
need you to do is just tell me exactly
what to do and I was like huh
and she's like yeah I've never done this
before I have no idea like I just need
you to tell me step by step what to do
the first time
I'm like okay and so literally we walked
through like a basically a pipeline
process to find like cool experiences
that she can have and we and like I just
step by step here and I like she wrote
the email and then I read the email gave
her my feedback and then every step who
do I send how do I send it blah blah
blah blah and now she's doing it on her
own she doesn't need my help at all and
she's running the process but she
literally needed me and I was completely
am I I don't want to tell you how to do
it I want you to be your own authority
right and she was like the authority of
me he says this is what I wanted
this is what I want
and and maybe and I think probably it
was really important for us to go to the
place where she just asked for it
because then and because then it was I
was not nagging I wasn't
I wasn't you know telling her how to do
things she she had taken the step of
asking me which is something really
critical
so yeah this is a huge part of I see so
many kids
either rebelling against what their
parents want or trying to please their
parents and not having learned their own
authority and and by the time they're 17
18 years old I think it's really
important for their self-confidence to
learn
this is they're they're in charge of
their choices and they get to make
mistakes and screw up and come for
advice when they want and they get to
call in other authorities
when it serves them and they're they can
bring that into awareness and not just
have it be a
default subconscious pattern of someone
else knows better and I need this
that's right yeah and that's what I I
watch my girls do is they walk around
and they look for good advice
and which was always my hope because I
was I was so ignorant that way because I
had such a crappy relationship with
authority I thought all authority was
bad so I never got really great advice
through my life from and I was
surrounded by great people who could
have given me great advice
and so I'm really happy that they have
that capacity to do that and at the same
time
know what's right for them wow
beautiful beautiful teachings I'm cool
really glad that we're so 100
airtight correct about everything
certainly
under all contexts for every person
thank you everybody for listening I
really enjoyed this Joe thanks for the
conversation yeah pleasure total
pleasure yeah sincerely though everybody
if you're if you're listening to this
and there's something that's like
catching in you like Adam and you have a
question
please send it to us you can tweet it to
us at Art of a comp you can also send us
an email at podcast art of
accomplishment.com or just visit the
website and reach out through there and
that's also where you can find our
courses and anything else about us
coaching all of our other offerings yeah
so thank you Joe thank you everybody
yeah I really love this conversation
this is a good one me too me too all
right talk to you soon
[Music]
thank you
foreign